Adding an Extensible Object Header (#502)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

start of the session.  The ALPN value {{!RFC7301}} used by the protocol
is `moq-00`.

> ## Version and Extension Negotiation {#version-negotiation}

Reviewer: I don't think we want to remove this text yet.  There could be extensions that aren't extension headers we may want to negotiate?

Reviewer: I agree with your intuition, but I'd like to minimize the size of this change, so I'm going to leave this text for now.

start of the session.  The ALPN value {{!RFC7301}} used by the protocol
is `moq-00`.

> ## Version Negotiation and Extension Negotiation {#version-negotiation}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Version and Extension Negotiation {#version-negotiation}
```

URI; if `query` is present, the client MUST concatenate `?`, followed by
the `query` portion of the URI to the parameter.

> #### REQUIRED-EXTENSION parameter {#required-extensions}

Reviewer 2: I don't think it makes sense to negotiate object extensions with the relay. This would be like negotiating HTTP header extensions with a socks proxy. Other types of extensions we need too negotiate with server but not these.   I think we can just remove this part of the PR.

Author: This negotiation has now changed slightly. The clients uses the revised REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter to indicate which extensions it would like and the server responds with the sub-set of those that it does support. The client may then chose to continue or disconnect. 

Since we have separate rules that relays MUST always forward all headers and MUST NOT modify them, any negotiation is practically only going to happen at the final hop. I agree that its utility is limited. I would like to remove it, but first I want agreement from those who wanted it in there in the first place.

Author: Negotiation was removed with the latest commit, following discussion at the interim.

> The REQUIRED-EXTENSION parameter (key 0x02) allows the client to specify

Reviewer: This is a potentially painful way to negotiate extensions.  What about making it REQUESTED-EXTENSION and then the server responds with the ones it supports of the requested set?  At that point, if the client wants to close the connection because the server doesn't support a required extension, then it can.

Author: @ianswett  - I have modified the PR with this [commit ](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/502/commits/ab407f75b8954c445f6dd1efef919631f93b58d2) to modify the extension negotiation and to rename the parameter to REQUESTED_EXTENSION

> The REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter (key 0x02) allows the client to request
> the server to acknowledge support for  multiple Extension Header types
> {{object-extensions}} which are required for operation. The value is a
> concatenation of varints, each describing a 32-bit extension header type.
> This parameter is optional. If this parameter is present in the
> CLIENT_SETUP message, then the server MUST respond with a
> REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter in its SERVER_SETUP message. This parameter
> MUST list the subset of those extensions previously requested by the client
> which the server supports. If the server does not support any of the
> requested extensions, then it MUST respond with a parameter value length of 0.
> The client can then choose to continue or disconnect the session, at its
> discretion.

multiple Extension Header types {{object-extensions}} which are required for
operation. The value is a concatenation of varints, each describing a
32-bit extension header type. This parameter is optional. If the server does

> not support a requested REQUIRED-EXTENSION, then it MUST close the connection.

Reviewer 3: I don't think closing the connection is right here. If a relay don't need to understand the extension, it just forwards it .

Author: This has now changed. It is now a REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter list from client to server with a response from the server. The client may then choose whether it wants to continue or disconnect.

Author: Additionally, all relays MUST forward and not modify all extensions.

URI; if `query` is present, the client MUST concatenate `?`, followed by
the `query` portion of the URI to the parameter.

#### REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter {#requested-extensions}

> The REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter (key 0x02) allows the client to request

Reviewer 4: I struggle to understand how this header is useful unless all relay's in the chain forward it upstream towards the publisher for those that are related to the media content. 

Are we envisioning both next hop extension as well as whole chain extensions?

the server to acknowledge support for  multiple Extension Header types
{{object-extensions}} which are required for operation. The value is a

> concatenation of varints, each describing an integer extension header type.

Author: Draft text has now changed to ".. a sequence of"

This parameter is optional. If this parameter is present in the
CLIENT_SETUP message, then the server MUST respond with a

> REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter in its SERVER_SETUP message. This parameter

Reviewer: See comment above, but I think it should be different if we want to allow for asymmetric negotiation?

MUST list the subset of those extensions previously requested by the client
which the server supports. If the server does not support any of the
requested extensions, then it MUST respond with a parameter value length of 0.
The client can then choose to continue or disconnect the session, at its
discretion.

> 

Reviewer 3: I am not too sure of the purpose of this parameter.
I am struggling understand what it means to say "server supports" .

> 

Reviewer 3: I am not too sure of the purpose of this parameter.
I am struggling understand what it means to say "server supports" .

Author: Imagine in the future we introduce a new header which signals to a relay that it should transmit this object in its own QUIC stream (for whatever reason). By "supporting" this header, the publisher is signalling that it is aware of any relay processing rules which that header may invoke.

Reviewer 3: How about we have something along the lines in the core transport ( below formulation ,may be, exactly what you have, but i am writing it down in a single place to see if we all can agree)

### Relay Extension Processing Rules
1. If a relay understands an extension, it follows the rules as described by the specification that defines the extension, when processing such an extension. Such rules may be to  modify the extension ( by updating or by removing it), for example.
2. If the extension specification requires a given relay to understand an extension but relay doesn't support such an extension, it is treated as protocol violation.
3.  Else  the  MUST forwards the received extension as-is to downstream relays/subscribers.

Now on the point on  how to know if a relay understands an extension or not , there are couple of options
1. Reserve code points for such extensions OR
2. Use setup parameters to identify extensions

Extensions are per object property. I am not totally sure if we need stream level extensions at the moq layer though.

URI; if `query` is present, the client MUST concatenate `?`, followed by
the `query` portion of the URI to the parameter.

#### REQUIRED-EXTENSION parameter {#required-extensions}

The REQUIRED-EXTENSION parameter (key 0x02) allows the client to specify
an Extension Header type {{object-extensions}} which is required for
operation. The value is the 32-bit type expressed as a varint. This

> parameter is optional. Multiple of these parameters may be sent in a

Reviewer 5: This contradicts [section 6.1](https://moq-wg.github.io/moq-transport/draft-ietf-moq-transport.html#section-6.1), which states that there MUST NOT be duplicate parameters. I'm fine with lifting that restriction, though. If necessary, I think we could add this restriction to individual parameters that can't be duplicated.

```suggestion
parameter is optional. Multiple of these parameters MAY be sent in a
```

Author: @mengelbart  - good point. We either 
1. redefine section 6.1 to indicate that no duplicate parameters are allowed except for Required-Extension, which may be duplicated. 
2. Or we change the serialization of the VALUE of the REQUIRED-EXTENSION parameter. Since each extension type is a varint, and the length of the parameter is specified, the parser can just keep reading varints until it reaches the length. In this way, multiple extension types can be communicated in a single REQUIRED-EXTENSION parameter and we can retain the existing requirement that parameters MUST NOT be duplicated. 

Preference?

Author: I went with option 2. Now there is only a single Required Extension parameter key. It's value can hold a concatenation of multiple Extension Header numerical types

#### MAX_SUBSCRIBE_ID {#max-subscribe-id}

The MAX_SUBSCRIBE_ID parameter (Parameter Type 0x02) communicates an initial
value for the Maximum Subscribe ID to the receiving subscriber. The default
value is 0, so if not specified, the peer MUST NOT create subscriptions.

#### REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter {#requested-extensions}

> The REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter (key 0x03) allows the client to request

Reviewer: This extension mechanism I believe means any extension is available to both client and server?  Alternatively, in QUIC extensions like Ack Frequency can be negotiated separately in each direction.

I can see the pros and cons of either, but if my understanding is correct, I think it's worth stating that explicitly.

Author: This is an Object header, and Objects flow from Publisher to Subscriber. The publisher would be writing the extension header and the subscriber would be reading and/or forwarding it. A "client' and "server" can fulfill either one, or both, of those roles. Not sure therefore that we need to state that the extension is available to be read by a subscriber, as that is a de facto property of all the Object headers.

Reviewer: I understand the reasoning that if you understand the header, you understand the header.  But I'm unsure what the purpose of negotiation is in that context?  Is it to negotiate optimizations to headers or content, such as compression?

Author: Negotiation was introduced to support the enforcement of a a required per-hop object encoding between publisher and subscriber behavior. For example, imagine a hypothetical log tracing extension, carrying a log trace. The client may want to indicate that it does not want a connection to the server if the server doesn't support logging by way of the specified extension. 

However, after our first interim call on this subject, we agree to loosen the constraints for extensions to "Extension Headers SHOULD be forwarded and SHOULD NOT be modified by relays". This considerably weakens any attempt to enforce an end-to-end behavior across a delivery chain.

So one of the key questions to resolve this week is "Do we need to negotiate extensions at all?" We could leave them on a best-efforts basis for now and then get some implementation experience around whether or not we require negotiation and whether or not that negotiation should be bi-directional.

Reviewer: I'd be happy to not negotiate them for now and reconsider that later if it turns out to be useful.

Author: Agreed. Negotiation has been removed with latest commit.

the server to acknowledge support for  multiple Extension Header types
{{object-extensions}} which are required for operation. The value is a
concatenation of varints, each describing an integer extension header type.
This parameter is optional. If this parameter is present in the
CLIENT_SETUP message, then the server MUST respond with a
REQUESTED-EXTENSION parameter in its SERVER_SETUP message. This parameter
MUST list the subset of those extensions previously requested by the client
which the server supports. If the server does not support any of the

> requested extensions, then it MUST respond with a parameter value length of 0.

Reviewer: Omitting the parameter also seems ok, but that's a detail?

Author: We have now removed negotiation entirely.

* Object Status: As enumeration used to indicate missing
objects or mark the end of a group or track. See {{object-status}} below.

* Object Extension count: the number of Object Extension Headers present. See
  {{object-extensions}} below. A value of 0 indicates that no Object Extension

>   Headers are present.

Reviewer 3: I think this should allow actual extensions too not just the count. isn't it?  This will be needed especially when serving object from the cache, then those extensions needs to be sent along

Author: I was thinking that Extension headers are immutable. If the publisher adds them, then any relay forwarding that object must preserve them. The object would be cached along with any extension headers it was carrying.

Reviewer 5: I think @suhasHere meant that the actual object extensions should be included as a canonical field, not just the count.

Author: I have updated the coanonical fields definitions to inlcude both fields, as shown below. 

> * Object Extension Count: The number of Object Extensions present. A value of 0
>   indicates that no Object Extension Headers are present.
>   
> * Object Extensions : an optional concatenation of Object Extension Headers. See
>   {{object-extensions}} below.

in cases such as a relay dropping a group and reseting the stream the
group is being sent on.

#### Object Extension {#object-extensions}
An Object Extension is a concatenation of optional Extension Headers. These
headers are visible to relays. Extension headers specified via the
REQUIRED-EXTENSIONS parameter {{required-extensions}} in the SETUP message

> MUST be parsed by relays. Extension headers not specified via the

Reviewer 3: I understand the MUST. But I wonder if we should add a indicator in each extension to include if it needs to be forwarded as well.  These extension headers must not be modified by the relays either to be complete. Since some of the extensions are useful to downstream.

Author: The assumption is that these extensions headers must always be forwarded and must not be modified by any relay. I could add language stating that explicitly?

Reviewer 5: I think explicit language to state that extensions must be forwarded would be useful. Maybe it's enough to replace "MUST be parsed" with "MUST be forwarded"?

Reviewer: I think we should say that headers MUST be forwarded and MUST NOT be modified if that's what we intend.

I'd like to have these authenticated when using MoQ per-object encryption, but that's a different draft.

Reviewer 3: agree with @ianswett  and @mengelbart  .. Making it explicit is good in these cases.

I see GroupId, ObjectId and Extension Header can fall in to this category. 

Secure objects uses ObjectId and GroupId to be authenticated and encrypted end to end, for example.

I am sure there will some use-cases that would have extensions whose scope is hop by hop too. I will be totally ok to have an scope field in the extension that identifies if it is between original-publisher and end-subscriber or not.

Author: Given that we have no means, as Alan has pointed out, of propagating header requirements beyond the immediate hop, it means that if any relay wants to use the extension header then all relays must forward them and not modify them. I have therefore modified  the language to read that 

> Extension headers MUST be forwarded and MUST NOT be modified by relays.

Reviewer 3: I am fine with this as a starting place. If we may decide to support a way to indicate HBH vs E2E extensions, then we can address how to best solve it. 

Starting with MoQ Relays forwarding extensions as-is seems fine to get some implementation experience. 

Also https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-mzanaty-moq-loc/ and https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-jennings-moq-secure-objects-01 defines extensions that might be more than hbh scoped for example.

Author: Following agreement at yesterday's interim meeting, I updated the language to be 

> Extension Headers are defined in external specifications and registered in an IANA table {{iana}}. These specifications define the type and value of the header, along with any rules concerning processing, modification, caching and forwarding. A relay which is coded to implement these rules is said to "support" the extension.
> 
> If unsupported by the relay, Extension Headers MUST NOT be modified, MUST be cached as part of the Object and MUST be forwarded by relays
> 
> If supported by the relay and subject to the processing rules specified in the definition of the extension, Extension Headers MAY be modified, MAY be cached and MAY be forwarded.

REQUIRED-EXTENSIONS parameter MAY be ignored by relays. The purpose of
Extension Headers is to allow the transmission of application-specific
data as well as future evolution of the transport protocol. Object
Extensions are serialized as defined below:

~~~
Object Extension {
  Extension Header (..) ...
}

Extension Header {
  Header Type (i),
  Header Length (i),

>   Header Value (..)

Reviewer 3: Header Value should be opaque bytes.

Author: Clarification - opaque to whom - the relays?  Object headers values are not opaque to relays and nor are Extension Header values. If an application wants to hide content from a relay then it needs to place it in the Object payload (which is opaque) and not the headers.

Reviewer 3: If a relay supports an extension, it can parse it.  We know that from setup message that if a relay supports an extension or not, isn't it.

Author: With yesterday's interim, resolved with agreed language

> Extension Headers are defined in external specifications and registered in an IANA table {{iana}}. These specifications define the type and value of the header, along with any rules concerning processing, modification, caching and forwarding. A relay which is coded to implement these rules is said to "support" the extension.
> 
> If unsupported by the relay, Extension Headers MUST NOT be modified, MUST be cached as part of the Object and MUST be forwarded by relays
> 
> If supported by the relay and subject to the processing rules specified in the definition of the extension, Extension Headers MAY be modified, MAY be cached and MAY be forwarded.

}
~~~
{: #object-extension-format title="Object Extension Header Format"}

* Header type: an unsigned 32-bit integer, registered in the IANA table

>   'MOQ Extension Headers'. See {{iana}}.

Reviewer 3: I think we are missing iana section. 
At a high level, the iana registration must have
 - extension type, reference to rfc that defines the extenson
 -  this needs to be specification required

Author: Yes, the [IANA section ](https://moq-wg.github.io/moq-transport/draft-ietf-moq-transport.html#name-iana-considerations)of the whole MOQT document is a big todo. I added the requirement to define the MOQ extension Headers table to Section 8. I figure the editors plan to handle all the IANA stuff towards the end. It will be specifications required etc once it is defined.

Reviewer 3: +1 .. makes sense. thanks

> ##### Extension Header type 0 {#extension-header-zero}

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need this defined ? Can you please share your thoughts on why we need this ?

Author: This default extension header provides a simple way to add ad-hoc name/value pairs to any object. This is similar to the ability of clients and servers to define custom request and response headers in HTTP-land. That functionality has proven extremely useful and efficient in enabling rapid development, testing and deployment of solutions without having to go to IANA registries or revise specifications. I'd like a similar capability within MOQT hence Extension Header Type Zero.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the context.  Still i don't see if this adds much value in end to end context.

Author: Based on your and others feedback, I have removed (via  commit https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/502/commits/e1764972a4dc1be7fac8e1777462c560df6d6385) the Extension header type 0 definition. It can be added back in the future if necessary.

* Object Status: As enumeration used to indicate missing
objects or mark the end of a group or track. See {{object-status}} below.

* Object Extension Count: The number of Object Extensions present. A value of 0
  indicates that no Object Extension Headers are present.

* Object Extensions : an optional concatenation of Object Extension Headers. See

>   {{object-extensions}} below.

Reviewer 2: I'd like to talk about ideas to bit pack the extension indictors to save space but conceptually good with this.

Author: We can look at bit packing once we have some implementation experience. Resolving for this draft.

* Object Status: As enumeration used to indicate missing
objects or mark the end of a group or track. See {{object-status}} below.

* Object Extension Count: The number of Object Extensions present. A value of 0
  indicates that no Object Extension Headers are present.

* Object Extensions : an optional concatenation of Object Extension Headers. See

>   {{object-extensions}} below.

Reviewer 3: Like to understand what do we mean by concatenation here ?

Author: Meaning a series of Object Extension headers, serialized in sequence without any delimiters between them.

in cases such as a relay dropping a group and reseting the stream the
group is being sent on.

#### Object Extension {#object-extensions}
An Object Extension is a concatenation of optional Extension Headers. These
headers are visible to relays. Extension headers MUST be forwarded and
MUST NOT be modified by relays. The purpose of Extension Headers is to
allow the transmission of application-specific data as well as future
evolution of the transport protocol. Object Extensions are serialized as
defined below:

~~~
Object Extension {
  Extension Header (..) ...
}

Extension Header {
  Header Type (i),
  Header Length (i),
  Header Value (..)
}
~~~
{: #object-extension-format title="Object Extension Header Format"}

* Header type: an unsigned 32-bit integer, registered in the IANA table

>   'MOQ Extension Headers'. See {{iana}}.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to make sure that small numbers are reserved for thing where space is issue, medium size numbers are for things that are standards, and large numbers are totally first come first serve and super easy to get and use any way you want.

Author: With this [commit](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/502/commits/3759564cffa9a066349de4d018aba601f9c117d3) I have added guidance language for the IANA registration of the extension header types. 

>  MOQ Extension headers - we wish to reserve extension types 0-127 for
>   standards utilization where space is a premium, 128 - 16383 for
>   standards utilization where space is less of a concern, and 16384 and
>   above for first-come-first-served non-standardization usage.

These ranges correspond to 1-bye, 2 bytes and 3 bytes and beyond with varint encoding.

##### Extension Header type 0 {#extension-header-zero}

> This specification defines a utility extension header. The value of this header

Reviewer 2: I think this whole extension should be moved to a separate draft that helps illustrate how to define an extension and show that we got things defined in a way where a separate draft can define an extension. 

I'm not a huge fan of it, I would rather that it was easy to get a number code point for "fluffy-idea-of-perfectp-trace-id" rather than put strings in the protocol that would better in an IANA table but I agree with a low friction way of getting customer extensions.

Author: Based on your and others feedback, I have removed (via commit https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/commit/e1764972a4dc1be7fac8e1777462c560df6d6385) the Extension header type 0 definition. It can be added back in the future if necessary.

in cases such as a relay dropping a group and reseting the stream the
group is being sent on.

#### Object Extension Header {#object-extensions}
Object Extension Headers are visible to relays. Extension Headers MUST be
forwarded and MUST NOT be modified by relays. The purpose of Extension

> Headers is to facilitate the future evolution of the transport protocol.

Reviewer 3: I don't see the last sentence here is needed.

Author: I removed that sentence with latest commit.

in cases such as a relay dropping a group and reseting the stream the
group is being sent on.

#### Object Extension {#object-extensions}

> An Object Extension is a concatenation of optional Extension Headers. These

Reviewer 4: I am bit worried by the usage of word Optional here? What exactly is optional? Looking below I get the impression that Extension header handling are depending on role of the node but in no case are they truly optional, other than it comes to the publisher including them. 

A Relay must forward and not modify
A client must be capable of receiving and ignoring them.

Author: This text was replaced along with the processing rules. 

> Object Extensions : A sequence of Object Extension Headers. See {{object-extensions}} below.

> Object Extension Headers are visible to relays and allow the transmission of future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Extension Headers MUST NOT carry metadata bound to the Object payload. Such metadata should instead be serialized into the payload.

headers are visible to relays. Extension headers MUST be forwarded and

> MUST NOT be modified by relays. The purpose of Extension Headers is to

Author: Following the interim, we added new processing rules for relays and removed negotiation during setup.

> allow the transmission of application-specific data as well as future

Author: Language changed to 

> Object Extension Headers are visible to relays and allow the transmission of future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Extension Headers MUST NOT carry metadata bound to the Object payload. Such metadata should instead be serialized into the payload.
> 
> Extension Headers are defined in external specifications and registered in an IANA table {{iana}}. These specifications define the type and value of the header, along with any rules concerning processing, modification, caching and forwarding. A relay which is coded to implement these rules is said to "support" the extension.
> 
> If unsupported by the relay, Extension Headers MUST NOT be modified, MUST be cached as part of the Object and MUST be forwarded by relays
> 
> If supported by the relay and subject to the processing rules specified in the definition of the extension, Extension Headers MAY be modified, MAY be cached and MAY be forwarded.

> evolution of the transport protocol. Object Extensions are serialized as

Author: I went with 

> Object Extension Headers are visible to relays and allow the transmission of future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution.

defined below:

~~~
Object Extension {
  Extension Header (..) ...
}

> Extension Header {

Reviewer 2: A very common use case if an extension that caries a single integer - for example in voice applications the audio level specified in RFC6464. For some voice only applications this can be critical to keep the overall bandwidth very small. For these very special uses cases, I would like a shorter encoding so here is my proposed change

For type values above 20, it looks just like how you have it. But for type values less than that, it becomes just the type followed by  value which is a varint. Removing a byte out of every audio packet does make a real difference to some applications.

Reviewer 2: Glad to send a PR to your PR if this sounds reasonable to you

Author: @fluffy  - this seems like a reasonable improvement.  I updated the PR with commit https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/502/commits/6f31642317f2fbddbc151db2f8994bf0fd10818b to reflect this improved compression scheme for extension types <=0x20

  Header Type (i),
  Header Length (i),
  Header Value (..)
}
~~~
{: #object-extension-format title="Object Extension Header Format"}

* Header type: an unsigned integer, encoded as a varint and registered in the
  IANA table 'MOQ Extension Headers'. See {{iana}}.

##### Extension Header type 0 {#extension-header-zero}

> This specification defines a utility extension header. The value of this header

Reviewer 4: If this is kept in, it purpose needs to be clarified. But it feels like this is creating an additional extension space.

Author: Based on your and others comments, I removed (via commit https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/commit/e1764972a4dc1be7fac8e1777462c560df6d6385) the Extension header type 0 definition. It can be added back in the future if necessary.

  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),
  Publisher Priority (8),
  Extension Count (i),

>   [Extension headers (...)],

Reviewer 3: Updating to latest changes will get rid of most of the changes that follow

Author: Rebased as of 20min ago.

  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),
  Publisher Priority (8),

>   Extension Count (i),

Author: We can merge with the 1byte for now, but then I have opened a new issue #666  to capture this and other proposals for bit-packing the extension count.

* Subscribe Error codes
* Announce Error codes
* Message types
* MOQ Extension headers - we wish to reserve extension types 0-127 for
  standards utilization where space is a premium, 128 - 16383 for
  standards utilization where space is less of a concern, and 16384 and

>   above for first-come-first-served non-standardization usage.

Reviewer 4: Should this space be greased or any particular picking algorithm?

Reviewer 6: +1 on greasing - let's get these reserved now and people adding them in their implementation from day one

Reviewer: There's an issue filed for GREASING, FYI: https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/issues/416

Author: I added a simple greasing scheme. 

> Header values: even types are followed by a single varint encoded value. Odd types are followed by a varint encoded length and then the header value. Every integer multiple of 17 or 18 is a reserved greasing value. These types MUST be treated as unsupported by a relay. Header types are registered in the IANA table 'MOQ Extension Headers'. See {{iana}}.

* Object Status: As enumeration used to indicate missing
objects or mark the end of a group or track. See {{object-status}} below.

* Object Extension Count: The number of Object Extensions present. A value of 0
  indicates that no Object Extension Headers are present.

> * Object Extensions : an optional concatenation of Object Extension Headers. See

Reviewer: How about just "A sequence of ..."?

```suggestion
* Object Extensions : A sequence of Object Extension Headers. See
```

Though some status information could be inferred from QUIC stream state,
that information is not reliable and cacheable.

#### Object Extension Header {#object-extensions}

> Object Extension Headers are visible to relays. Extension Headers SHOULD be

Author: Relays can now modify extensions which they "support". 

> Extension Headers are defined in external specifications and registered in an IANA table {{iana}}. These specifications define the type and value of the header, along with any rules concerning processing, modification, caching and forwarding. A relay which is coded to implement these rules is said to "support" the extension.
> 
> If supported by the relay and subject to the processing rules specified in the definition of the extension, Extension Headers MAY be modified, MAY be cached and MAY be forwarded.

> forwarded and SHOULD NOT be modified by relays. The purpose of Extension

Author: We now say

> Extension Headers are defined in external specifications and registered in an IANA table {{iana}}. These specifications define the type and value of the header, along with any rules concerning processing, modification, caching and forwarding. A relay which is coded to implement these rules is said to "support" the extension.
> 
> If unsupported by the relay, Extension Headers MUST NOT be modified, MUST be cached as part of the Object and MUST be forwarded by relays
> 
> If supported by the relay and subject to the processing rules specified in the definition of the extension, Extension Headers MAY be modified, MAY be cached and MAY be forwarded.

Headers is to facilitate the future evolution of the transport protocol.
Object Extension Headers are serialized as defined below:

~~~
Extension Header {
  Header Type (i),
  [Header Value (i)]
  [Header Length (i),
   Header Value (..)]
}
~~~
{: #object-extension-format title="Object Extension Header Format"}

* Header type: an unsigned integer, encoded as a varint, identifying the type
  of extension and also the subsequent serialization. Header types in the range

>   0x00 - 0x20 inclusive are followed by a single varint encoded value. Header

Reviewer: This is very similar to 'Parameters'.  It might make sense to use the same encoding for both?

I understand the interest in optimizing for varints, but in both case we could have odd types always be a single varint and even be length+value if we wanted?

Author: The same count+TLV encoding is already used for both Parameters and Extension Headers (modulo the varint optimization for extension types 0..20). Is your proposal that we don't call them Extension Headers and instead use Parameters? That would require migrating the varint version to Parameters which complicates things. Over the wire the bits are identical, so I'm inclined to leave the definition as it is.

Reviewer: I think calling them Extension Headers is good, but I'd rather the wire format be described as being identical to Parameters.  It's close today, but as you point out, not quite identical.

In the past, someone, possibly @martinduke proposed making all even parameter values encoded as varints and odd encoded as variable length binary values.  I think that proposal may make sense for both extension headers and parameters.

Author: Based on yesterday's interim discussion, I modified the serialization to use the even|varint, odd|TLV scheme. 

> Header values: even types are followed by a single varint encoded value. Odd types are followed by a varint encoded length and then the header value. Every integer multiple of 17 or 18 is a reserved greasing value. These types MUST be treated as unsupported by a relay. Header types are registered in the IANA table 'MOQ Extension Headers'. See {{iana}}.

In a future edit, if parameters also adopt the even/odd scheme, then we can update Extensions to refer to the parameters serialization.

Though some status information could be inferred from QUIC stream state,
that information is not reliable and cacheable.

#### Object Extension Header {#object-extensions}
Object Extension Headers are visible to relays and allow the transmission of
future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Any Object metadata not
used by the transport SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object and not as

> an extension header.

Reviewer 7: minor: s/part of the Object/part of the Object payload/

I can live with SHOULD here; perhaps RECOMMENDED is also ok?  My reasoning is that if the transport will never look at the extension, it shouldn't waste any time parsing out the fields.  However, as Suhas pointed out, it's unenforceable, and a relay cannot distinguish between an unsupported extension and payload.

> an extension header.

Reviewer 2: The problem with serializing in the object is that the object will be end to end encrypted in many cases and thus the rely can not read it. Take the example of capture timestamp for media. Relay can look at this timestamp to figure out how much lag. Then  metrics dashboard can take differences of lag to figure out the latency between two relays. This type of operational information is supper useful on running real systems. SRTP which we are trying to replace with MoQ is explicitly designed to keep that type of timing information in the readable hops along the media path. I feel very strongly we need the same sort of thing here. 

We could introduce two types of option , relay options, and client options so that the relay did not need to parse the client options. Or another design could be to introduce object headers that were not end to end encrypted.  But all of these options end up using another byte even if there are no headers and that is a big impact for audio only applications. 

I don't buy the parsing time problem. Anything reasonable relay is going to be able to parse to the level to check if it is interested in any of the extensions on single core at a rate that greatly exceeds whatever networking technology it uses and probably exceeds the bandwidth to non cached memory so you can probably parse this as fast as you can memcpy it. Either way, I just don't see any performance problem. 

I could live with this saying 

"Any metadata which will not be read or logged by any relay ever including use for operational or diagnostic reasons, 
 SHOULD NOT be sent in an extension header."

Reviewer 7: Individual Comment:

Let me start at the end, because I think we agree:

> "Any metadata which will not be read or logged by any relay ever including use for operational or diagnostic reasons, SHOULD NOT be sent in an extension header."

This is what I was trying to express.

The current text is:

> Any Object metadata not used by the transport SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object and not as an extension header.

Maybe just amending it to 

> Any Object metadata _never accessed_ by the transport _or relays_ SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object payload and not as an extension header.

?

Author: I'm ok with below text in the interests of advancing the spec. perhaps @ianswett can edit when merging or do you want me to make another commit?

> Any Object metadata never accessed by the transport or relays SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object payload and not as an extension header.

At Denver interim, I'd like to debate the use case where we add timing data to extensions. While it appears useful, it binds the protocol to the payload, which I ardently believe we should strive to avoid. Media flows will want timestamps, gaming systems will want 3D coordinates, vehicle tracking systems will wants GPS coordinates etc. Do we add all of these use cases to the core transport, or do we try to architect a more generic "index" which can be exposed to relays and provide similar utility without the payload binding?

> future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Any Object metadata not
> used by the transport SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object and not as
> an extension header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Any Object metadata never accessed by the transport or relays SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object
payload and not as an extension header.
```

Though some status information could be inferred from QUIC stream state,
that information is not reliable and cacheable.

#### Object Extension Header {#object-extensions}
Object Extension Headers are visible to relays and allow the transmission of
future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Extension Headers MUST NOT

> carry metadata bound to the Object payload. Such metadata should instead

Author: Modified text as suggested with commit https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/502/commits/10298c40d680d350282d4ad699f1b992034461f3

Extension Headers are defined in external specifications and registered in an
IANA table {{iana}}. These specifications define the type and value of the
header, along with any rules concerning processing, modification, caching and
forwarding. A relay which is coded to implement these rules is said to
"support" the extension.

If unsupported by the relay, Extension Headers MUST NOT be modified, MUST be
cached as part of the Object and MUST be forwarded by relays

If supported by the relay and subject to the processing rules specified in the
definition of the extension, Extension Headers MAY be modified, MAY be cached
and MAY be forwarded.

Object Extension Headers are serialized as defined below:

~~~
Extension Header {
  Header Type (i),
  [Header Value (i)]
  [Header Length (i),
   Header Value (..)]
}
~~~
{: #object-extension-format title="Object Extension Header Format"}

* Header type: an unsigned integer, encoded as a varint, identifying the type
  of the extension and also the subsequent serialization.
* Header values: even types are followed by a single varint encoded value. Odd
  types are followed by a varint encoded length and then the header value.

>   Every integer multiple of 17 or 18 is a reserved greasing value. These types

Reviewer: I think in the Wednesday virtual interim we decided to do greasing as a separate PR?

>   Every integer multiple of 17 or 18 is a reserved greasing value. These types

Author: Removed greasing with https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/502/commits/10298c40d680d350282d4ad699f1b992034461f3

Though some status information could be inferred from QUIC stream state,
that information is not reliable and cacheable.

#### Object Extension Header {#object-extensions}
Object Extension Headers are visible to relays and allow the transmission of

> future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Any Object metadata never accessed by the transport or relays SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
future metadata relevant to MOQT Object distribution. Any Object metadata never
accessed by the transport or relays SHOULD be serialized as part of the Object
```

}
~~~

Sending a group on one stream, with the first object containing an
Extension Header.

~~~
Stream = 2

STREAM_HEADER_GROUP {
  Subscribe ID = 2
  Track Alias = 2
  Group ID = 0
  Publisher Priority = 0
}
{
  Object ID = 0
  Extension Count  = 1

>     { Type = 0

Reviewer: I think this example needs to be updated?  I think types below a certain value are all varints?

* Announce Error codes
* Announce Cancel Reason codes
* Message types
* MOQ Extension headers - we wish to reserve extension types 0-127 for
  standards utilization where space is a premium, 128 - 16383 for
  standards utilization where space is less of a concern, and 16384 and

>   above for first-come-first-served non-standardization usage.

Reviewer 2: This seems like about the right approach to IANA registrations

* Announce Error codes
* Announce Cancel Reason codes
* Message types
* MOQ Extension headers - we wish to reserve extension types 0-127 for

>   standards utilization where space is a premium, 128 - 16383 for

Author: Isn't 1 byte max 127 ?

> 1 Byte (7 bits for data)
> Largest decimal integer: 127
> 
> 2 Bytes (14 bits for data)
> Largest decimal integer: 16,383
> 
> 3 Bytes (21 bits for data)
> Largest decimal integer: 2,097,151

>   standards utilization where space is a premium, 128 - 16383 for

Reviewer 2: @wilaw - I think that MoQ should be changed to work the way you think it works (see https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/issues/549)  but it does not

Right now the encoding is defined in section 16 of RFC 9000
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000#section-16

And for 1 byte, you only get 6 bits of data not 7.

  standards utilization where space is less of a concern, and 16384 and
  above for first-come-first-served non-standardization usage. Additionally,

>   every integer multiple of 17 or 18 is a reserved greasing value and MUST

Reviewer: I agree that I'd prefer to do greasing of everything in a separate PR, and I don't think we have to use any of the 1 byte codepoints.  Those are the ones I'm pretty sure will work.

>   every integer multiple of 17 or 18 is a reserved greasing value and MUST

Author: Removed greasing with https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/502/commits/10298c40d680d350282d4ad699f1b992034461f3
